#### Eye Stalk Wand
_Wand, very rare (requires attunement)_

**Crafted by:** Beholder Eye Stalk x1 (Artificer)

This wand has 5 charges. While holding this wand, you may spend an action and 1 charge to shoot a magical ray of energy at a target within 120 feet of you. The type of ray depends on the type of beholder eye stalk that the wand was crafted from. Consult the list below to find out what your wand does.
1. ﻿﻿﻿Charm Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or be charmed by you for 1 hour, or until you harm the creature.
2. ﻿﻿﻿Paralyzing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Constitution saving throw or be paralyzed for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
3. ﻿﻿﻿Fear Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or be frightened for 1 minute. The target can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
4. ﻿﻿﻿Slowing Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the target's speed is halved for 1 minute. In addition, the creature can't take reactions, and it can take either an action or a bonus action on its turn, not both. The creature can repeat the saving throw at the end of each of its turns, ending the effect on itself on a success.
5. ﻿﻿﻿Enervation Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 16 Constitution saving throw, taking 8d8 necrotic damage on a failed save, or half as much damage on a successful one.
6. ﻿﻿﻿Telekinetic Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 Strength saving throw or you can it up to 30 ft. in any direction. It is restrained by the ray's telekinetic grip until the start of your next turn or until you are incapacitated. If the target is an object weighing 300 pounds or less that isn't being worn or carried, it is moved up to 30 ft. in any direction. You can also exert fine control on objects with this ray, such as manipulating a simple tool or opening a door or a container.
7. ﻿﻿﻿Sleep Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Wisdom saving throw or fall asleep and remain unconscious for 1 minute. The target awakens if it takes damage or another creature takes an action to wake it. This ray has no effect on constructs and undead.
8. ﻿﻿﻿Petrification Ray. The targeted creature must make a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw. On a failed save, the creature begins to turn to stone and is restrained. It must repeat the saving throw at the end of its next turn. On a success, the effect ends. On a failure, the creature is petrified until freed by the greater restoration spell or other magic.
9. ﻿﻿﻿Disintegration Ray. If the target is a creature, it must succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 10d8 force damage. If this damage reduces the creature to 0 hit points, its body becomes a pile of fine gray dust. If the target is a Large or smaller nonmagical object or creation of magical force, it is disintegrated without a saving throw. If the target is a Huge or larger object or creation of magical force, this ray disintegrates a 10-foot cube of it.
10. ﻿﻿﻿﻿Death Ray. The targeted creature must succeed on a DC 16 Dexterity saving throw or take 10d10 necrotic damage. The target dies if the ray reduces it to 0 hit points. 

This wand recovers 1d4 charges at dawn. When you use the last charge of the wand, there is a 10 per cent chance that it crumbles into ashes and is destroyed.