#### Black Thistle Poison
If it can be done without killing oneself, collecting parts of the Black Thistle, grinding it up and distilling it produces pure Black Thistle poison. This extraordinarily deadly poison is jet black with a suspension of metallic cobalt mica-like powder and fumes faint purple gases when its ampule is opened, filling a 10 ft. cube for a maximum of 30 minutes before being evaporated completely. When this poison is applied to weapons or up to 10 pieces of ammunition, the poison remains active for 30 minutes and 3 minutes respectively. During this period, these objects project the same fumes as an open ampule. 

Exposure to these fumes for more than 12 seconds forces the exposed creature to make a DC 13 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 4 necrotic damage and is  blinded for 30 seconds. On a successful save, the creature takes 2 necrotic damage. Repeated short exposure has no effect for 12 hours after first exposure. 

Exposure for 5 minute or more a day forces the creature to make a DC 16 Constitution saving throw. On a failed save, the creature takes 2d8 necrotic damage and is blinded for 5 days. On a successful save, the creature takes half damage and heavily blurs vision for 5 hours. If a creature is exposed for another (cumulative) 5 minutes, the creature takes 2d12 necrotic damage and is permanently blinded, which can be restored with any type of regenerative magic or potion. There is no saving throw. Further exposure has no effect for 24 hours.

Contact with the blood or injection with a dose of this poison sufficient for at least 15 minutes of fuming is much, much more dangerous. It forces the target to make a DC 18 Constitution saving throw at disadvantage. On a failed save, the target takes 5d12 necrotic damage, becomes permanently blinded, deaf, is unable to smell or taste and has its senses of touch reduced by 80% for the remainder of its life. It also experiences crippling pain in its eyes, ears, mouth, nasal cavity and every part of its skin for 4 hours. The pain can be somewhat alleviated with strong pain killers, but the sensory damage can only be restored by regenerative magic cast at level 6 or higher or 4 doses of Potion of restoration spread over a month. On a successful saving throw, the target takes 3d8 necrotic damage and is either blinded or deafened and loses either its sense of smell or taste for 1 day, the DM's choice, and has its sense of touch reduced by 35% for 12 hours. This level of damage to the senses can be restored with regenerative magic cast at level 2 or higher or a Potion of Restoration. It experiences the same level of pain as if the target had failed the saving throw for 12 hours, which can also be alleviated with strong painkiller. 

Type: Exposure, Injection, Injury
Ingredients: Black Thistle parts (4)