The Cowled Wizards Of Amn
That which people do not understand, they fear Given all the magical mishaps and evils let loose by wiz ards in Amns history, is it any wonder that wizards are censured, shunned, and nearly outlawed there? The Cowled Wizards were originally created by Alisar of Esmeltaran over a century ago to preserve magical lore in a realm that might benefit from this knowledge despite the peoples fears. The wizards saw themselves as saviors of the Art and as agents of Azuth and Deneir. Moving underground, they became librarians of lore and teachers to those with potential. The Cowled Wizards also kept an eye on foreign wizards passing through Amn, keeping rogue wizards in line to protect Amnians and the Cowled Wizards’ secrecy. 

In organization, each cell of Cowled Wizards is isolated in a town or city, and the highest-level mage of the settlement rules. As long as politics do not pit one cell leader against the first and still largest Athkatlan cell and its leader (Khollynnus Paac, a textiles merchant and 17th-level wizard), local Cowled Wizards can meet others in Athkatla in secret rooms beneath Jann Lane. One may learn here of contacts who can lead a person to distant Cowled Wizard cells, to join or communicate with the wizards there. 

By day, the Cowled Wizards work as merchants, booksellers, herbalists, apothecaries, or the like. In meetings, they wear their cowled hoods and robes (based on those of graduates of the School of Wonder, destroyed decades ago). Any Cowled Wizards can share his identity with family, local wizards, or correspondents, but the cowls allow anonymity if desired. Most Cowled Wizards know only two or three other members true names. Many wonder why the Cowled Wizards remain in Amn at all, given the relative intolerance to magic there. Most in the membership simply don't want to abandon their homeland. Others are firmly entrenched among Amns many power structures, and still others believe they must keep
Azuths faith and Mystras magic alive here.

In the past century of the groups existence, a few members chose to use the knowledge and power of the group for their own ends. Their motives were often political, and they used magic to erase rivals, fix deals, and take other actions not condoned by their fellows. The Cowled Wizards in general dislike roguish actions and usually censure (if not eliminate) the guilty to prevent their own discovery but they have not found the latest rogues among them. Lady Varytha Gheldieg of Eshpurta is one of a trio attempting to regain an agent among the Council of Six, unaware that the Council watches them through Tyrda Q Helvor, the new Pommarch. Tyrda plans to learn more of the Cowled Wizards plots by hiding among the main assembly. In addition, the most dangerous rogue has only recently joined the flock as Lady Gheldiegs apprentice: the lovely Zallanora Argentresses, who finds many admirers and volunteer tutors among the Cowled Wizards.

# Hidden Enclaves of the Cowl
Over 16 separate caches of magical equipment or libraries of magic lie hidden throughout Amn,
each in its own “safehold.” Usually, each cell’s highest-level mage is the official organizer of its safe-
hold. Of all the Cowled Wizards’ libraries, its greatest is Alisarhold, just east of Riatavin among the
Snowflake Mountains. Alisarhold is operated and controlled by Purgan of Riatavin, a primary rebel
behind that city’s defection, but it is still open for the use of all Cowled Wizards for study or safety.